
=head1 NAME

log-monitor - configuration file syntax

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The configuration file for the log-monitor(1cs) command is very
similar to a Windows B<.ini> file, with the following clauses and field
meanings.
Field values have leading and trailing white space stripped from them.

=head2 Match Clauses

A clause whose name commences with a lower case letter
specifies a match rule that may be used in monitoring a file.
Currently the only supported field is "B<re>" which specifies a regular
expression.
Example:

  [ sshd ]
  re = sshd\[[0-9]+\]:

This clause matches typical sshd(8) messages in a syslog(5) file.

=head2 Log File Clauses

A clause whose name commences with a slash ('/')
specifies a log file to monitor for matches.
Each field in the clause specifies a test with a match rule and an action.
Each field name must be distinct within the clause.
The field value consists of a word naming a match clause
and an action to take when it occurs.

When a line matches, a report is composed of the form:

  unixtime YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS testname logfile line

consisting of the UNIX time (seconds since the start of 1970, a float),
the date (year, month, day) and time (hours, minutes, seconds) in local time,
the name of the test (the field name),
the pathname of the log file (the clause name)
and the text of the matches line.

The following actions are supported:

=over 2

=item B<E<gt>E<gt>> I<pathname>

The report line is appended to the file specified by I<pathname>.

=item B<|> I<shell command>

When log-monitor(1cs) starts
a pipe is opened to an instance of the I<shell command>.
Matching lines cause the report line to be written to this pipe.

=item B<!> I<shell command>

Matching lines cause the report to be written to the shell command:

  read when dmy hms test logfile line; shell command

The I<shell command> may thus make use of the report content via the shell
variables B<$when>, B<$dmy>, B<$hms>, B<$test>, B<$logfile>, B<$line>.

This form should only be used for infrequent matches because a subshell
(and its subcommands in turn) is spawned for each match.

=item B<SYSLOG> [B<@>I<host>] I<facility> I<level>

Matching lines cause the report:

  testname logfile line

to be delivered to syslog.
If the optional word B<@>I<host> is present then the remote syslog
on the specified host receives the packet
otherwise it is delivered to the local syslog service.

I<facility> is one of the words B<kern>, B<user>, B<mail daemon>, B<auth>, B<lpr>, B<news>, B<uucp>, B<cron> or B<local[0-7]>.

I<level> is one of the words B<emerg>, B<alert>, B<crit>, B<err>, B<warning>, B<notice>, B<info> or B<debug>.

=back

Example:

  [ /var/log/messages ]
  cron = cron >>/var/log/cron-lines
  sshd1 = sshd >>/var/log/sshd-lines
  sshd2 = sshd ! echo "$logfile: $line" >>/var/log/terser-sshd-lines

This clause monitors the file B</var/log/messages> for distinctive lines.
The first field (B<cron>) watches for lines
matching the clause named "B<cron>" (not shown)
and the corresponding report lines appended to the file B</var/log/cron-lines>.
The second and third fields (B<ssh1> and B<ssh2>) both watch for lines
matching the clause named "B<sshd>".
The former (B<sshd1>) appends report lines to the file B</var/log/sshd-lines>.
The latter (B<sshd2>) appends lines of the form:

  /var/log/messages: matched-line

to the file B</var/log/terser-sshd-lines> using a shell B<echo(1)> command.

=head1 BUGS

There should be a way to cause a reread of the configuration file and
a reconfigure.

=head1 SEE ALSO

log-monitor(1cs), tail(1), logger(1), logto(1cs)

=head1 AUTHOR

Cameron Simpson E<lt>cs@zip.com.auE<gt>

