
=head1 NAME

vt - data structures used in the vt(1) Venti-like system
mailfiler - a Maildir monitor for filing email messages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  mailfiler monitor [-1] [-d delay] [-n] [-N] [-R rules_pattern] maildirs...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The mailfiler(1cs) command files email messages in Maildirs according
to simple text rules as described in mailfiler(5cs).

=head1 MODES

=head2 monitor

IN the "monitor" mode I<mailfiler> watched the specified I<maildirs> for email messages
and files each according to a sequence of rules in the matching rules file
(see mailfiler(5cs)).

The matching rule file is named:

  $HOME/.mailfiler/{maildir.basename}

where "{maildir.basename}" is the basename of the named Maildir.

Each Maildir is consulted in turn, so filings which delivery messages
into Maildirs named later on the command line will cause the filed
message to be processed in this run when that later Maildir is
reached.

The following options are available in monitor mode:

=over 4

=item B<-1>

File at most 1 message per Maildir.

=item B<-d> I<delay>

Delay I<delay> seconds between runs.
Default is to make only one run over the Maildirs.

=item B<-n>

No remove. File messages but do not remove successfully filed messages from the source Maildir.

=item B<-N>

No save. UNIMPLEMENTED.

=item B<-R> I<rules_pattern>

Specify the rules file pattern used to specify rules files from Maildir names.
Default: $HOME/.mailfiler/{maildir.basename}

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

mailfiler(5cs), procmail(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Cameron Simpson E<lt>cs@zip.com.auE<gt>

