
=head1 NAME

pilfer - a web data extractor

=head1 SYNOPSIS

pilfer [-c config] [-j jobs] [-q] [-u] [url] URL [pipeline-spec...] actions...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The pilfer(1cs) command traverses web pages from a supplied starting page
according to a sequence of actions supplied on the command line
which act somewhat like a shell pipeline;
each action is applied to the current list of URLs
and the results passed to the subsequent actions.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-c> I<config>

Load the contents of the pilferrc(5) file I<config>,
prepending it to the list of pilferrcs consulted.
Pilferrcs may contain settings,
"seen" set backing stores,
action shorthands,
and pipeline definitions.

=item B<-j> I<jobs>

Set the number of concurrent tasks to I<jobs>, default 4.

=item B<-q>

Quiet. Do not recite the final set of strings the emerge from the end of the pipeline.

=item B<-u>

Unbuffered. Flush print actions as they occur.

=back

=head1 Command Line Modes

At present there is just one mode, "URL" mode.

=head2 URL MODE

The B<url> operator introduces an URL from which to commence the traversal,
passing it to the specified action pipeline. This takes the form:

  [url] URL [pipeline-spec...] actions...

The "url" operator is optional if the supplied URL starts with "http://" or "https://".

The starting URL may be followed by operation named pipeline definitions,
introduced with a word of the form I<name>B<:{> and ended with the word B<}>.
(Note: zsh(1) users will find the setting "B<setopt IGNORE_CLOSE_BRACES>" useful
in their shell configuration.)
Example:

  new_sql_files:{ hrefs .sql unseen:sql_files:save }

This defines a pipeline named "new_sql_files" which performs the operations shown above.

After any pipeline definitions come an explicit piple of actions,
comprising the main pipeline which processes the supplied URL.

=head1 Operation

Conceptually, the pipeline passes sets of URLs (strings) from one action to the next.
Each action operates on the list and produces a new list of strings for use by the following action.
Although the new list of strings may in principle not be actual URLs,
usually they are and for convenience the following documentation will refer to them as URLs
or the "item".

In fact, most action operate on individual URLs from the list as they arrive
and pass their result forward as it is generated,
so an input URL which takes longer to process will not hold up the processing
of other URLS;
actions occur in parallel as inputs arrive,
subject the overall job parallelism controlled by the B<-j> option.
Only actions which work on the list as a whole, such as "B<sort>",
wait for all their inputs to arrive before generating output URLs.

=head3 Context

Each URL has an associated context, initialised once at the start of the main pipeline.
The context includes operating state such as variable names,
user agent string,
chain of pilferrc(5cs) files,
named pipeline instances
and "seen" sets.
Most actions pass this unchanged context to the outputs from a given item.
Some action such as "B<per>" or "B<for>" construct a copy of the existing context
in order to provide item specific state for following actions.
This copy has new copies of the variable names and user agent,
but uses the same instances of the
chain of pilferrc(5cs) files,
named pipeline instances
and "seen" sets.

=head3 Seen Sets

Pilfer keeps named sets of strings called "seen sets" to track known strings, typically URLs.
The "see" action and the "seen" and "unseen" selection actions manipulate and consult these sets.

For persistent state,
it is possible to associate these sets with a backing file in the pilferrc(5cs) configuration,
a simple flat text file of strings, one per line.
Seen sets with backing files update the backing file immediately when a string is marked as seen,
and other instances of pilfer(1cs) monitor their backing files and will see the addition.

=head3 Variable Substitution

Several actions accept arguments which are subject to variable name substitution.
A string subject to substitution may contain replacement strings
with the syntax of the Python Format Specification Mini-Language:

  http://docs.python.org/2/library/string.html#formatspec

The field names come from the URL's context variable names.
Aside from any ad hoc names defined during the pipeline operation,
several names are predefined, computed from the URL itself.
These include:

=over 4

=item B<basename>

The URL basename, essentially the final "file" part of the URL path.

=item B<domain>

The URL domain name part (the hostname with the leading component removed).

=item B<hostname>

The URL hostname part.

=item B<url>

The current URL.

=back

=head2 Actions

=over 4

=item B<#>I<text...>

An action commencing with an octothorpe ('B<#>') is ignored.
This is convenient for commenting out specific actions during debugging.

=item B<..>

Pass the parent of each item in the list, as dirname(1) does for file pathnames.

=item [B<->]B<.>I<ext>

Pass items ending in the file extension "B<.>I<ext>".
With a leading "B<->", discard items ending in the file extension "B<.>I<ext>".

=item [B<->]B</>I<regexp>[B</>]

Pass items matching I<regexp>.
If there are named subgroups in I<regexp>, save them as the named variables.
With a leading "B<->", discard items matching I<regexp>.

=item B<!>I<shcmd>

Perform variable substitution on I<shcmd> and execute the result via the shell sh(1).
Pass each line of output to the next action.

=item B<|>I<shcmd>

Pipe input list through I<shcmd>:
if the current list is not empty,
perform variable substitution on I<shcmd> using the first item's
context and execute the result via the shell sh(1), supplying the
current list of items as input.
Pass each line of output to the next action.

=item I<shorthand>

Any action shorthand defined in the B<[actions]> section of a pilferrc file
will be replaced by its expansion.
See pilferrc(5cs).

=item B<delay:>I<seconds>

For each item, sleep for I<seconds> before passing it on.
Note: this delays individual items in their traversal of the pipeline;
parallelism will allow concurrent operation to proceed.

=item B<domain>

Pass the domain part of the URL; the hostname with the leading component removed.

=item B<divert:>I<pipename>[B<:>I<selector>]

Divert all items to the pipeline named I<pipename>.
The pipeline will be created if missing.
If the optional I<selector> is supplied,
divert only items matching the selector and pass the rest.
I<selector> may be any "selection" type action
such as "B<.>I<ext>", "B</>I<regexp>B</>" or "B<same_scheme>".

=item B<first>

Pass only the first item in the list.

=item B<for:>I<varname>B<=>I<values>

Perform variable substiution on I<values> and then separate into values on whitespace.
For each value, copy the current context,
set I<varname> to the value, and pass the context and item.

=item B<for:>I<varname>B<:>I<start>B<..>I<stop>

Perform variable substiution on I<start> and I<stop> and then treat as integers.
For each value from I<start> to I<stop> inclusive, copy the current context,
set I<varname> to the value, and pass the context and item.

=item [B<grok>:]I<modulename>B<.>I<callname>

Grok the fullness of the current item;
call an arbitrary python function for special purpose evaluation of an item.
Import the python module named I<modulename>.
Call I<modulename>B<.>I<callname>B<( (P,U) )>
where B<P> is the item's pilfer context
and B<U> is the item/URL.
The callable should return a mapping of I<varname> to I<value>,
typically a dict.
This mapping will be applied to the current context's variables.

=item B<grokall>:I<modulename>B<.>I<callname>

Grok the fullness of the current list of items;
call an arbitrary python function for special purpose evaluation of the item list.
Import the python module named I<modulename>.
Call I<modulename>B<.>I<callname>B<( items )>
where B<items> is an iterable of B<(P,U)> tuples as for B<grok>.
The callable should return a mapping of I<varname> to I<value>,
typically a dict.
This mapping will be applied each item context's variables.

=item B<hostname>

Pass the hostname part of the URL.

=item B<hrefs>

Fetch each URL in the list and pass all URLs referenced by B<HREF>s in the page.

=item B<last>

Pass only the last item in the list.

=item B<new_save_dir>

Create a new save directory based on the value of B<{save_dir}>,
and set B<{save_dir}> to the pathname of the new directory.

=item B<pipe:>I<pipename>[B<:>I<selector>]

Pipe all items through an instance of a pipeline made from the specification named I<pipename>.
Pass the results of the pipeline.
If the optional I<selector> is supplied,
pipe only items matching the selector and pass the rest directly.
I<selector> may be any "selection" type action
such as "B<.>I<ext>", "B</>I<regexp>B</>" or "B<same_scheme>".

=item B<per>

Create a new pipeline context for each item.
Normally all items pass through a shared pipeline stage for any action.
This has relevance for actions which apply to multiple items, such as B<sort>;
the whole set of items at that stage is sorted.
After a B<per>, each items commences its own pipeline context.

=item B<print>[B<:>I<text>]

Print I<text> after variable substitution, by default the current URL ("B<{url}>").

=item B<query>[B<:>I<field>,...]

The "query" part of the URL;
the ampersand ("B<&>") separated list of "field=value" pairs after the "?" in a "GET" method query.
If I<field>s are specified,
pass the comma separated list of field values correspond to the specified I<field>s.
Example: from the URL B<http://example.com/foo?x=1&y=2>, B<query> passes "B<x=1&y=2>"
whereas B<query:x,z,y> passes "B<1,,2>".

=item B<quote>

Pass the URL-encoded form of the current URL.

=item B<s/>I<regexp>B</>I<replacement>B</>[B<g>][B<i>]

Perform a substitution on the current item after the style of sed(1).
The separator, denoted above by B</>,
may be any character not occuring in the I<regexp> or I<replacement>.
I<regexp> is a valid Python regular expression (which broadly means
Perl compatible, which in turn encompasses "extended regular
expressions").
I<replacement> is a piece of text subject to pilfer variable substitution.
The I<replacement> and terminating separator may be followed by the optional modifiers:
"B<g>" to do a global replace, changing all matching subtexts
and "B<i>" to do a case insensitive match.

=item B<same_domain>

Pass items with the same B<{domain}> as the referring URL.

=item B<same_hostname>

Pass items with the same B<{hostname}> as the referring URL.

=item B<same_scheme>

Pass items with the same B<{scheme}> as the referring URL.

=item B<save>[B<:>B<saveas>=I<filename>,B<dir=>I<savedir>]

Save the content of the current URL into the directory specified by B<{save_dir}>
into a file specified by B<{basename}>.
The optional parameters B<saveas> and B<dir> may be supplied to override these defaults.
In particular, passing B<saveas=-> writes the URL content to standard output.

=item B<see>[B<:>I<seenset>,...[B<:>I<value>]]

Perform variable substitution on I<value>, by default "B<{url}>".
Mark this value as "seen" in the named I<seenset>s, by default "B<_>".
This will be persistent is the seenset has a backing store file.

=item B<seen>[B<:>I<seenset>,...[B<:>I<value>]]

Perform variable substitution on I<value>, by default "B<{url}>".
Test if this value is "seen" in any of the named I<seenset>s, by default "B<_>".
Pass the current item if seen.

=item B<sort>

Sort the list, emitting its members in order.

=item B<srcs>

Fetch each URL in the list and pass all URLs referenced by B<SRC>s in the page.

=item B<title>

Pass the page title of the URL B<{page_title}>.

=item B<type>

Pass the URL's Content-Type B<{content_type}>.

=item B<unique>

Pass only unique members of the list to the output,
discard members already passed.

=item B<unquote>

Try the current item as URL-encoded and pass the decoded form.

=item B<unseen>[B<:>I<seenset>,...[B<:>I<value>]]

Perform variable substitution on I<value>, by default "B<{url}>".
Test if this value is "seen" in any of the named I<seenset>s, by default "B<_>".
Pass the current item if unseen.

=item I<varname>=I<value>

Perform variable substitution on I<value> and store the result as the variable named I<varname>.
This is done for each item, and is therefore most meaningful when there is only one item in the list,
as at the start of the pipleline or after "B<per>" or "B<for>".

=item I<varname>==I<value>

Perform variable substitution on I<value> and compare the result
against the value stored in the variable named I<varname>;
pass the current item only if the values are equal.

=item I<varname>!=I<value>

Perform variable substitution on I<value> and compare the result
against the value stored in the variable named I<varname>;
pass the current item only if the values are not equal.

=item I<varname>B<~>I<selector_action>

By defaults, any I<selector_action> acts on the current item/URL.
This syntax applies the I<selector_action> to the value of the specified variable.

=item B<xml:>I<match>

Parse the URL content as XML and pass all tags found by the XPath I<match>.

=item B<xmlattr:>I<attribute>

Parse the URL content as XM and pass the attribute values named I<attribute>.

=item B<xmltest:>I<match>

Parse the URL content as XML and pass all tag named I<match>.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

Print new stories and mark them as seen in the "stories" seen set:

  pifler url http//example.com/stories.html hrefs unseen:stories print see:stories

=head1 SEE ALSO

pilferrc(5cs)

=head1 AUTHOR

Cameron Simpson E<lt>cs@cskk.id.auE<gt>

