
=head1 NAME

pilferrc - pilfer(1cs) configuration file format

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A pilferrc file supplies configuration information for the pilfer(1cs) command.

=head1 SYNTAX

The pilferrc is a Windows-style .ini file parsed by Python's SafeConfigParser class.
In particular, it supports RFC822 line continuation so that long
lines may be broken into multiple lines by indenting the second and
following lines.

=head2 Sections

=head3 [DEFAULT]

This contains general global mode configuration:

=over 4

=item seen_dir

The default directory in which to store seen set backing files.
The value has environment variable substitution performed on it.

Example:

  seen_dir = $HOME/var/pilfer/seen

=back

=head3 [seen]

A mapping of seen set name to backing file name for seen sets with backing files.
The backing file name has environment variable substitution performed on it.
If the backing file name does not commence with "/", "./" or "../"
then the global B<seen_dir> path is prepended to it.

Example:

  stories = stories

=head3 [actions]

A mapping of action shorthand names to action sequences.
A shorthand name is translated into the equivalent sequences of action
when action pipelines are evaluated.
The shorthand definition is broken into action strings with the python shlex.split() function.

Example:

  [actions]
  unquery = 's/\?[^?]*$//'
  unanchor = 's/#.*//'
  is_archive = '/\.(tar|tgz|tar\.gz|tar\.bz2|cpio|rar|zip|dmg|pkg)$/'
  archives = hrefs is_archive

=head3 [pipes]

A mapping of pipe names to pipeline definitions.
These are used as named pipeline definitions by pilfer(1cs)' "B<pipe:>" and "B<divert:>" actions.
Pipeline definitions are broken into action strings with the python shlex.split() function.

Example:

  # select story URLs matching "news" items
  egsite_stories = /-news// s/#comments$// 's/&reffrom=.*//' unique '/\.s?html$/'

  # select unseen news items from list of hrefs
  egsite_new_stories = pipe:egsite_stories unseen:egsite_stories

=head1 SEE ALSO

pilfer(1cs)

=head1 AUTHOR

Cameron Simpson E<lt>cs@cskk.id.auE<gt>

