
=head1 NAME

vt - data structures used in the vt(1) Venti-like system

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The vt(1cs) command provides access to data stored in a Venti-like
content addressed data store.
This manual entry describes the data structures used.

=head1 BASIC ENCODINGS

=head2 Binary Sequential (BS) Encoding

BS encoding is used throughout where non-negative integers are stored,
allowing values of arbitrary size to be represented.
BS encoding transcribes a non-negative integer into a big endian byte
(octet) sequence of arbitrary length.
The most significant bit of each byte is a continuation bit;
if it is 1 then there is a following byte in the sequence,
if it is 0 then it is the final byte in the sequence.
The 7 lower order bits contribute to the value.
The value starts at zero
and as each byte is gathered from the sequence
the value is right shifted 7 places (a multiplication of 128)
and the 7 low order bits of the new byte are added to the value.

=head2 Hex/Text Encoding

Raw byte sequences are sometimes encoded as mix of text and hexadecimal
sequences where textual representation is required,
such as on the command line or in B<.vt> archive files.
These sequences represent each byte as a pair of hexadecimal characters
as would be printed by the B<%02x> printf(3) format specifier,
except between pairs of square brackets;
between a '[' and a ']' a range of byte values
which correspond to a limited set of printable ASCII codes
are presented as is.
This enhances the readablity of several transcriptions
that contain text portions,
notably directory entries.

=head1 DATA STORAGE FORMATS

=head2 On Disc Block Store

The on disc content is stored in flat files consisting of a sequence
of I<size>/I<zblock> chunks.
The I<size> is a BS encoded value specifying the number of bytes in the
zblock segment.
The I<zblock> segment is a ZLib compressed version of the raw data block as
returned from Python's zlib.compress() function.

A data store managed by the cs.venti.gdbmstore.GDBStore class
consists of a directory holding several of the flat files
described above, named B<I<n>.vtd> where I<n> is a number counting from 0.
The contents of the store are indexed by a GDBM file named B<index>
which is a mapping from block hash value (an SHA1 hash)
to a 3-tuple of (I<n>, I<offset>, I<zsize>)
where I<n> references a particular B<I<n>.vtd> file,
I<offset> specifies the byte offset of the start of the I<zblock>
and I<zsize> is the length of the I<zblock>.
This tuple is stored as the concatenation of the BS encodings of these
three values.

=head2 Filesystem Structure

When files or directories are archived to the store
their content is encoded as follows.

=head3 Block References (BlockRefs)

A BlockRef consists of a tuple (I<indirect>, I<span>, I<hashcode>).
I<indirect> is a Boolean value;
0 means false and indicates that the BlockRef refers to a data block,
1 means true and indicates that the BlockRef refers to an "indirect" block
whose content is a sequence of BlockRefs.
The I<span> is the number of data bytes encompassed by the data to which the BlockRef refers;
for a direct BlockRef it will be the size of the data block,
for an indirect BlockRef it will be the sum of the I<span>s of the BlockRefs
stored in the indirect block.
The I<hashcode> is the SHA1 hash of the data block or indirect block.

The on disc storage of a BlockRef consists of a BS encoded I<flags> value,
the BS encoded I<span> value, a possible BS encoded I<hashtype>,
a possible BS encoded I<hashlen>,
and the hashcode.

The I<flags> value is a bitmap.
Bit 0 is the I<indirect> value: 0 for direct, 1 for indirect.
Bit 1 is to support other hash schemes than SHA1;
none is yet implemented.
If bit 1 is 0 then the hash type is SHA1
and the I<hashtype> value is omitted.
If bit 1 is 1 then the I<hashtype> value is present;
hashtype vaue 0 is reserved to designate SHA1
and no other types are yet implemented.
If the length of the hash code is not fixed by the hash type
then the I<hashlen> value is present;
for SHA1 this length is fixed and this value is not present.

=head3 Data Files

A data file is a sequence of data blocks.
It is indicated by a BlockRef which refers to the data blocks.

=head3 Directories

Directories are stored as data files
whose content is a sequence of Directory Entries.

=head3 Directory Entries (Dirents)

A Dirent consists of a tuple of (I<type>, I<meta>, I<name>, I<blockref>).
I<Type> has the value 0 for a data file and 1 for a directory.
I<Meta> contains metadata for the stored object.
I<Name> is the name of the stored object within the directory.
I<blockref> is a BlockRef for the content of the stored object.

The on disc storage of a Dirent consists of the BS encoded I<type>,
a BS encoded I<flags> bitmap,
an optional I<meta> chunk,
an optional I<name> chunk
and a BlockRef.
The I<flags> bitmap has bit 0 for I<hasmeta> and bit 1 for I<hasname>
which indicate the presence of I<meta> and I<name> chunks respectively.
If present, the I<meta> chunk encodes Meta Data (see below).
If present, the I<name> is a byte sequence containing the Dirent name,
consisting of a BS encoded I<namelen> and I<namelen> bytes containing the I<name>.

=head3 Meta Data

Meta Data consists set of (I<attribute>, I<value>) tuples
representing various object attributes
such as modification time, access control lists, etc.

The on disc storage of Meta Data consists of a BS encoded I<metalen>
and I<metalen> bytes containing the text encoding of the Meta Data.
The text encoding of Meta Data consists of a sequence of newline ('\n')
terminated records of the form:

  attribute:value

The following I<attributes> are currently implemented:

=over 4

=item B<m> - modification time

The B<m> attribute specifies the last modification time of the object
in seconds since the UNIX epoch.

On disc the value is encoded as a decimal integer or float.

Example: a current timestamp would be encoded as:

  m:1214727144

or

  m:1214727144.0


=item B<a> - Access Control List (ACL)

The value is a sequence of access controls
each of which is a tuple of (I<type>, I<qualifier>, I<allow>, I<deny>).
The first applicable control is used to govern access.
I<who> designates the applicability of the control;
a B<user> control applies if the accessing user matches the I<qualifier>,
a B<group> control applies if the accessing user is a member of the group designates by the I<qualifier>,
an B<other> control applies to any accessing user.
If the control applies, the rights listed in I<allow> are granted
and the rights listed in I<deny> are forbidden.

On disc, the B<acl> I<value> consists of a comma separated list of
encoded controls.
A B<user> control commences with the sequence B<u:>I<user>B<:>,
a B<group> control commences with the sequence B<g:>I<group>B<:>
and an B<other> control commences with the sequence B<*:>.
The I<allow> and I<deny> lists consist of a sequence of right designators
and are separated from each other by a dash ('B<->').
The dash may be omitted if the I<deny> list is empty.
The following right designations are supported:
B<r> - read,
B<w> - write,
B<x> - execute,
B<s> - for a B<user> ACL this is the UNIX setuid bit
and for a B<group> ACL this is the UNIX setgid bit,
B<t> - for an B<other> ACL this is the UNIX sticky bit.

Example: a typical UNIX 750 file permission would be represented as:

  a:u:cameron:rwx,g:staff:rx-w,*:-rwx

=back

=head2 VT Archive Files (.vt)

VT archive files are text files with one line per archive action.
By convention their names end in B<.vt>.
Each line is of the form I<dirent> I<date> I<time> I<comment>.
I<dirent> is a hex encoded representation of a Dirent on disc encoding.
I<date> has the form I<YYYY>B<->I<MM>B<->I<DD>.
I<time> has the form I<HH>B<:>I<MM>B<:>I<SS>B<.>I<s...>.
The comment contains arbitrary text and conventionally is the name of
the object that was archived.

=head1 SEE ALSO

vt(1cs)

=head1 AUTHOR

Cameron Simpson E<lt>cs@zip.com.auE<gt>

