doc/pypa-the-missing-outline.md, before:

# The Packaging Flow

The document aims to outline the flow involved in publishing a package,
usually to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/).
While the [tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/)
walks through the process of preparing a simple package for release
it does not fully enumerate what steps and files are required,
and for what purpose.

This guide is aimed at package publishers, and for simplification
presumes that that is also the package author.
Also, we will use the word package to cover modules as well.

To publish a package there needs to be a flow from the author's
source code to an end user's Python installation.
The steps to achieve this are as follows:

- have a source tree containing the package and associated metadata describing the
  package (name, version and so forth), typically a checkout from a version
  control system (VCS)

- prepare a configuration file describing the package metadata and
  how to create the build artifacts; for many packages this will
  be a static `pyproject.toml` file in the source tree,
  simple and hand maintained as part of the source tree

- create build artifacts to be sent to the package distribution service (usually PyPI);
  this will normally be a [source distribution ("sdist")](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Source-Distribution-or-sdist)
  and a number of [built distributions ("wheel" files)](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Built-Distribution);
  often there is just one generic wheel for a pure Python package;
  these are made by a build tool/system using the configuration file
  from the previous step

- upload the build artifacts to the package distribution service

At that point the package is present on the package distribution service.
To use the package, end users must:

- download one of the package artifacts from the package distribution service

- install it in their Python installation, usually in its `site-packages` directory;
  this install step may involve a build/compile step which, if needed, must
  be described by the package metadata

These 2 steps are typically performed by a tool like [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/).

These steps are described in more detail below.

## The Source Tree

The source tree contains the package source code, usually a checkout from a VCS.
The particular version of the code will will typically be from a checkout
based on a tag associated with the version.

## The Configuration File

The configuration file depends on the tool used to build the build artifacts.
Modern practice is a `pyproject.toml` file
in [TOML format](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml)
whose contents are specified by [PEP 518](https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/),
[PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/)
and [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/).

At a minimum, the `pyproject.toml` file needs:
- a `[project]` table containing the [Core Metadata](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/) for the project
  (name, version, author and so forth);
  the fields used in `pyproject.toml`
  are described in [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/)
- a `[build-system]` table specifying your build tool,
  which you will use to create the build artifacts
  and which an installer such as `pip` will use
  to complete an install from a source distribution

### The Build System

The build tool itself is specified by the required table `[build-system]`.
There are several choices available, including but not limited to:
- [setuptools](https://pypi.org/project/setuptools/)
- [flit](https://pypi.org/project/flit/)
- [poetry](https://pypi.org/project/poetry/)
- [hatch](https://github.com/ofek/hatch)
- [pdm](https://pypi.org/project/pdm/)
- [whey](https://pypi.org/project/pdm/)
- [trampolim](https://pypi.org/project/trampolim/)

Here is a table for using `setuptools`:

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools >= 61.0",
        "trove-classifiers",
        "wheel",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

or for `flit`:

    [build-system]
    requires = ["flit"]
    build-backend = "flit.api:main"

With such a table in the `pyproject.toml` file
a tool like [build](https://pypi.org/project/build/)
can run your chosen build system to create the build artifacts
and an install tool like `pip` can fetch and run the build system
when installing a source distribution.

The particular build system you choose dictates what additional information is required.
For example, `setuptools` wants a `setup.cfg` file containing package metadata
and it is prudent to provide a stub `setup.py` containing:

    from setuptools import setup
    setup()

or equivalent (setuptools is moving away from actually _running_ the `setup.py` file directly).

## Build Artifacts: the Source Distribution (sdist)

A source distribution contains enough to install the package from source
on an end user's system.
As such it needs the package source
and may well also include tests and documentation.
These are useful for end users wanting to develop your sources
and for end user systems where some local compilation step is required,
for example for a C extension.

A build system will know how to create one of these,
and the `build` package knows how to invoke your build system to create one:

    python3 -m build --sdist source-tree-directory

Or, of course, you can invoke your build tool directly.

## Build Artifacts: the Built Distributions (wheels)

A built distribution contains the completed files needed for a specific
end user system; no compilations steps are required during the install
and the wheel file can simply be unpacked into the right place.
This makes these faster and more convenient for end users;
tools like `pip` will fall back to the source distribtion
if a suitable wheel file is not available.
A pure Python package only needs one wheel for "generic" systems.

A build system will know how to create one of these,
and the `build` package knows how to invoke your build system to create one:

    python3 -m build --wheel source-tree-directory

Or, of course, you can invoke your build tool directly.

## Upload to the Package Distribution Service

The [twine tool](https://pypi.org/project/twine/)
can upload build artifact files to PyPI for distribution,
for example with a command like:

    twine upload dist/package-name-version.tar.gz dist/package-name-version-py3-none-any.whlpy3-none-any.whl

Some build tools will also include upload facilities.

## Download

Now that the package is published,
end users then download and install the package.
Typically this is done with `pip`, ideally wiith a command line like:

    python3 -m pip install package-name

where `python3` is the python executable which is to have `package-name` installed.

Commit message:

update flit recipe (PR https://github.com/cameron-simpson/css/pull/2 from takluyver) and add links to the tool documentation
--HG--
branch : pypi

doc/pypa-the-missing-outline.md, after:

# The Packaging Flow

The document aims to outline the flow involved in publishing a package,
usually to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/).
While the [tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/)
walks through the process of preparing a simple package for release
it does not fully enumerate what steps and files are required,
and for what purpose.

This guide is aimed at package publishers, and for simplification
presumes that that is also the package author.
Also, we will use the word package to cover modules as well.

To publish a package there needs to be a flow from the author's
source code to an end user's Python installation.
The steps to achieve this are as follows:

- have a source tree containing the package and associated metadata describing the
  package (name, version and so forth), typically a checkout from a version
  control system (VCS)

- prepare a configuration file describing the package metadata and
  how to create the build artifacts; for many packages this will
  be a static `pyproject.toml` file in the source tree,
  simple and hand maintained as part of the source tree

- create build artifacts to be sent to the package distribution service (usually PyPI);
  this will normally be a [source distribution ("sdist")](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Source-Distribution-or-sdist)
  and a number of [built distributions ("wheel" files)](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Built-Distribution);
  often there is just one generic wheel for a pure Python package;
  these are made by a build tool/system using the configuration file
  from the previous step

- upload the build artifacts to the package distribution service

At that point the package is present on the package distribution service.
To use the package, end users must:

- download one of the package artifacts from the package distribution service

- install it in their Python installation, usually in its `site-packages` directory;
  this install step may involve a build/compile step which, if needed, must
  be described by the package metadata

These 2 steps are typically performed by a tool like [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/).

These steps are described in more detail below.

## The Source Tree

The source tree contains the package source code, usually a checkout from a VCS.
The particular version of the code will will typically be from a checkout
based on a tag associated with the version.

## The Configuration File

The configuration file depends on the tool used to build the build artifacts.
Modern practice is a `pyproject.toml` file
in [TOML format](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml)
whose contents are specified by [PEP 518](https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/),
[PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/)
and [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/).

At a minimum, the `pyproject.toml` file needs:
- a `[project]` table containing the [Core Metadata](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/) for the project
  (name, version, author and so forth);
  the fields used in `pyproject.toml`
  are described in [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/)
- a `[build-system]` table specifying your build tool,
  which you will use to create the build artifacts
  and which an installer such as `pip` will use
  to complete an install from a source distribution

### The Build System

The build tool itself is specified by the required table `[build-system]`.
There are several choices available, including but not limited to:
- [setuptools](https://pypi.org/project/setuptools/)
- [flit](https://pypi.org/project/flit/)
- [poetry](https://pypi.org/project/poetry/)
- [hatch](https://github.com/ofek/hatch)
- [pdm](https://pypi.org/project/pdm/)
- [whey](https://pypi.org/project/pdm/)
- [trampolim](https://pypi.org/project/trampolim/)

Here is a table for using `setuptools` (see the [Setuptools documentation](https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/index.html)):

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools >= 61.0",
        "trove-classifiers",
        "wheel",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

or for `flit` (see the [Flit documentation](https://flit.pypa.io/en/latest/)):

    [build-system]
    requires = ["flit_core >=3.2,<4"]
    build-backend = "flit_core.buildapi"

With such a table in the `pyproject.toml` file
a tool like [build](https://pypi.org/project/build/)
can run your chosen build system to create the build artifacts
and an install tool like `pip` can fetch and run the build system
when installing a source distribution.

The particular build system you choose dictates what additional information is required.
For example, `setuptools` wants a `setup.cfg` file containing package metadata
and it is prudent to provide a stub `setup.py` containing:

    from setuptools import setup
    setup()

or equivalent (setuptools is moving away from actually _running_ the `setup.py` file directly).

## Build Artifacts: the Source Distribution (sdist)

A source distribution contains enough to install the package from source
on an end user's system.
As such it needs the package source
and may well also include tests and documentation.
These are useful for end users wanting to develop your sources
and for end user systems where some local compilation step is required,
for example for a C extension.

A build system will know how to create one of these,
and the `build` package knows how to invoke your build system to create one:

    python3 -m build --sdist source-tree-directory

Or, of course, you can invoke your build tool directly.

## Build Artifacts: the Built Distributions (wheels)

A built distribution contains the completed files needed for a specific
end user system; no compilations steps are required during the install
and the wheel file can simply be unpacked into the right place.
This makes these faster and more convenient for end users;
tools like `pip` will fall back to the source distribtion
if a suitable wheel file is not available.
A pure Python package only needs one wheel for "generic" systems.

A build system will know how to create one of these,
and the `build` package knows how to invoke your build system to create one:

    python3 -m build --wheel source-tree-directory

Or, of course, you can invoke your build tool directly.

## Upload to the Package Distribution Service

The [twine tool](https://pypi.org/project/twine/)
can upload build artifact files to PyPI for distribution,
for example with a command like:

    twine upload dist/package-name-version.tar.gz dist/package-name-version-py3-none-any.whlpy3-none-any.whl

Some build tools will also include upload facilities.

## Download

Now that the package is published,
end users then download and install the package.
Typically this is done with `pip`, ideally wiith a command line like:

    python3 -m pip install package-name

where `python3` is the python executable which is to have `package-name` installed.
