=head1 mkcd and mkiso - easy to use CD burning scripts

=keywords cd

=head2 Overview

L<./bin/mkcd>
and its precursor L<./bin/mkiso>
comprise a simple no-brainer data CD burning kit
for those of us who love the command line.

Also see their manual entries:
L<./manuals/mkcd.1.html> and L<./manuals/mkiso.1.html>.

=head2 Usage

Typical usage is:

=over 4

=item * Create directory for the CD contents

Its name should normally match desired the CD volume label.
Set it up
with everything you want for the CD laid out as you desire.
We'll pretend it's called I<dirname> below.

=item * Burn the CD:

	$ mkcd dirname

=back

Because you've pointed C<mkcd> at a directory it will call C<mkiso>
automatically to make an ISO9660 CDROM image.
If you wish you can exert finer control over things by making the ISO image
yourself with C<mkiso>.

B<Note>:
C<mkiso>
(and thus C<mkcd> if used as above)
make the ISO9660 image in the current directory
unless you use the B<-o> option.
In C<mkcd>'s case
this is primarily because generic places like F</tmp>
often don't have CD-sized amounts of free space.

These scripts have a few options
but are deliberately short on knobs to twiddle.
They're are naturally just wrappers for
Jörg Schilling's [L<http://www.fokus.gmd.de/research/cc/glone/employees/joerg.schilling/>
excellent
mkisofs and cdrecord utilites [L<http://www.fokus.gmd.de/research/cc/glone/employees/joerg.schilling/private/mkisofs.html>],
which have a great many knobs.

=head2 Installation

These are just scripts.
Install them in your execution C<$PATH>.
It will be necessary to tell C<mkcd>
your CD burner's SCSI id.
You can also specify the CD burner
through the environment variable C<$MKCDDEV>
or the F</etc/mkcdrc> or C<$HOME/.mkcdrc> files;
see the manual entries for details.
