=head1 syncopt - A Flexible and Simple Approach to Package Install

=keywords sysadmin

=head2 Overview

The L<./bin/syncopt> script and its associated work practices
are yet another approach to the standard sysadmin problem
of keeping multiple machines' software installations
up to date.
It is independent of the vendor's packaging scheme
and thus you can use either your vendor's system or syncopt, or both!

Also see the manual entry: L<./manuals/syncopt.1.html>.

The core notion is that the install is done once
on a central machine
and then syncopt takes care of attaching that to every client,
often via cron.

Like most such solutions,
syncopt has to achieve a few goals:

=over 4

=item * easy to use

=item * flexible enough to permit control
	of what is installed locally on a machine
	and what is served remotely from a central server
	(for disc space or other reasons)

=item * keep out of the way of the "vendor's namespace",
	to avoid treading on the vendor's install
	and conversely to protect our additions from
	damage by vendor upgrades and patches

=back

As implemented,
syncopt achieves this with the following advantages:

=over 4

=item lightweight

If a package is not to be installed local to a client
then the burden is usually just two symlinks on the client.

=item optional

You can install packages with syncopt or with the vendor's
packaging scheme,
or both!

=item permits trial installs

Under syncopt you can install multiple versions
of the same package for trial or legacy purposes.

=item centralised

The default package version is controlled
by a symlink on the master host; change that and
all the clients will follow suit next time they run syncopt.

=item customisable

Clients can control which packages are local
and also override which version is their default for
a given package.

=back

It presumes you have a "large" main machine
which can have an instance of everything installed on it
and that your other machines generally have mostly-local
core installs of the OS and main packages
and probably run most of the optional stuff from the main server
via NFS or other network filesystem.

=head2 Naming Issues

We will approach the last criterion first,
since it's crucial to having things work smoothly in the long run.
The vendor namespace tends to be F</usr>
and its children - F</usr/bin>, etc.
So, we elect not to install there.
Likewise, the "user namespace" or "local customisation namespace"
tends to be F</usr/local> and its children.
Although our users could use a F</opt>
style scheme, F</usr/local> is familiar
and has its own conventions.

Accordingly, I've taken a leaf out of Sun's book L<http://www.sun.com/>
and used F</opt>
for my syncopt scheme.
This doesn't actually fly in the face of Sun,
as Solaris packages are installed with names
of the form C<[A-Z]+[a-z0-9]+>.
Syncopt generally uses names of the form C<[a-z][a-z0-9]*-I<version>>,
so we can play happily in Sun's field without conflict.

=head2 File Tree Organisation

That decision made,
here is how we have things arranged at my workplace:

=over 4

=item F</u/syncopt>

We have a special user called "syncopt" to store the master copies
of everything to install in F</opt>.
That way we can put the master repository wherever we like.

Under that directory is a subdirectory called F<common>
for the architecture independent stuff
(config file, image/icon archives, scripts etc)
and a subdirectory matching the C<$ARCH> environment variable
for the architecture dependent stuff
(pretty well everything that gets compiled).

Here's the directory listing from ours:

	% ls -la /u/syncopt/.
	total 48
	drwxr-xr-x    8 root     bin          8192 Oct 12 14:45 .
	drwxr-xr-x   14 root     root         8192 Oct 11 15:05 ..
	drwxrwsr-x   17 root     technic      8192 Oct 14 11:56 common
	drwxrwsr-x    5 cameron  technic      8192 Sep  3 11:55 freebsd.x86.freebsd
	drwxrwsr-x    2 root     geeks          96 Jul 20  2000 redhat.ppc.linux
	drwxrwsr-x  184 cameron  geeks        8192 Oct 15 10:11 redhat.x86.linux
	drwxrwsr-x  155 root     geeks        8192 Sep 20 11:36 sun.sparc.solaris
	drwxrwsr-x    4 root     technic        96 Mar 13  2000 sun.sparc.sunos

=item F</opt>

F</opt>
is a real, local, directory on every client machine.
On machines which get most things from the server,
this is a forest of symlinks
pointing at the central copies
in F</u/syncopt>.
On machines with local copies of some things
the local copies are real directories,
exact images of those in the central F<opt>
directory and the non-local things are,
of course,
symlinks.

=back

The purpose of the syncopt script itself is to make the F</opt> directory
correctly configured with respect to F</u/syncopt>.

The core algorithm is simple and conservative:
for every subdirectory found in F</u/syncopt/I<arch>>
or F</u/syncopt/common>,
check the matching name in F</opt>.
If it is missing,
make it a symlink to the matching central item.
If it is a directory, ensure the contents are an exact
match for the central item,
using rsync(1) L<http://rsync.samba.org/>.

This behaviour can be overridden
with the F<L<"/opt/.syncopt">>
configuration file as described below.

=head2 Using syncopt

=head3 Local Package Install

As a consequence, to make an instance of something local
to a client machine (let's call it I<pkg>, release I<version>),
remove the local symlink:

	$ rm /opt/pkg-version

Make a stub directory:

	$ mkdir /opt/pkg-version

Alternatively, just edit the F<.syncopt> file and add this line:

	pkg-version local

Run syncopt:

	$ syncopt -x

That syncs everything. You can just do the new package like this:

	$ syncopt -x pkg pkg-version

which syncs the generic (unversioned) link and the version specific
local directory.

=head3 Undoing a Local Package Install

To make a once-local copy remote,
remove the local copy:

	$ rm -rf /opt/pkg-version

Also, if you edited the F<.syncopt> file as above,
remove that line.

Run syncopt:

	$ syncopt -x pkg pkg-version

=head3 Bringing a Client into Sync after a New Package Install

To set up a new client's F</opt> directory
after a fresh install:

	$ mkdir /opt	# if necessary
	$ syncopt -x

=head3 /opt/.syncopt

The behaviour deduced from the presence or absence of a directory
can be overridden with the F</opt/.syncopt> file,
which contains line of the form:

	pkg version

to make I<version> the default package version
on this particular machine,
or

	pkg local

to force a package to be local on this machine,
or

	pkg-version local

to make a particular version local,
or

	pkg nosync

to not run syncopt on it at all.

=head2 Installing packages for use with the syncopt scheme

A scheme such as this is naturally not useful without things to install
this way.

For very small packages
(usually only a single command and matching manual entry)
it's often not worth bothering with F</opt>,
instead installing them in the traditional way with the executable in
F</opt/bin>
and the manual in F</opt/man>
and so forth.

For larger packages
(netscape, emacs, vmware, the pbmtools, elm, mh, etc)
the F</opt> comes into its own.

When building the package from source or installing a binary distribution,
tell the package to install in
F</opt/I<package>-I<version>>.

Usually I<version> is the release version,
but occasionally I tack extra info into it, such as the build platform
where C<$ARCH> is too vague.
For example, I use B<redhat.x86.linux> for RedHat Linux platforms.
Unfortunately, these are not always binary compatible
and so I might make the version be C<I<version>-rh9> to indicate
it was built on RedHat 9.
In this way I can choose, say, a C<-rh7> build for RedHat 7 boxes.

For packages built with GNU autoconf
[L<http://sourceware.cygnus.com/autoconf/>]
this usually is as simple as adding the C<--prefix> option
to the C<configure> run:

	$ ./configure --prefix=/opt/package-version

Do the build as normal.
If it is successful,
set your umask to 2 for the install.
This presumes a group exists with write privileges in F</u/syncopt>
(ours is called "C<geeks>"),
then make the master directory and link it to the local F</opt>:

	$ umask 2
	$ mkdir /u/syncopt/arch/pkg-version
	$ ln -s /u/syncopt/arch/pkg-version /opt/.

then install as normal:

	$ make install

Then adjust the permissions on the master to prevent
accidental damage in the future:

	$ cd /opt/pkg-version	# should take you into /u/syncopt
	$ chmod -R a-w .

If that goes well, and this is to be the "default" version of the package,
add the generic symlink:

	$ cd /u/syncopt/arch
	$ rm -f pkg
	$ ln -s pkg-version pkg

Then run syncopt
or just make the same symlink in the local F</opt> by hand.
In this way you can now talk about a generic F</opt/I<package>>
in shell scripts, F</opt/I<pkg>/bin> in C<$PATH>
and so forth
without having these things know about the version.

This has the added advantage that upgrades are done by
installing the new version
and switching the symlink in F</u/syncopt>.
This way you can keep multiple versions around without conflict,
which is often quite handy with unstable or experimental upgrades
or for legacy uses.

It is quite important to never mention F</u/syncopt>
outside of this scheme - by having the package and everything which uses it
believe firmly in F</opt>,
making things local or shuffling versions "just works".

Having done the central install in this way,
saying:

	$ mkdir /opt
	$ syncopt -x

on every client machine suffices to finish things off.
This can be put in a nightly cron job
on each machine if you desire.

=head2 Complication

It all seemed so easy, didn't it?
Well, I've glossed over a few issues.
Let's peel back the paint:

=head3 What about $PATH?

Everything you've installed in F</opt>
will most likely not be in your users' C<$PATH>
or C<$MANPATH>,
so they won't be able to simply type the name of the package
and have it work.

There are three main approaches to correcting this situation:

=over 4

=item Add a special path to C<$PATH>

Edit your main C</etc/profile>
to insert the relevant bits into your users'
environment variables, eg:

	PATH=$PATH:/opt/package/bin
	export PATH

To keep central control of this kind of thing,
here we keep this stuff a file in F</opt/config/shell>
and simply source that from the F</etc/profile>.
That way,
aside from the initial edit of F</etc/profile>
on each client machine (to add the source line),
future package installs need only involve editing the central
file in F</u/syncopt/common/config/shell> and rerunning syncopt.

=item Supply a small wrapper script

Another class of package is the package with one main command
and a bunch of utility commands
used only during a run of the main command.
ELM [L<http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/hypertext/faq/usenet/elm/FAQ/faq.html>]
and MH [L<http://www.faqs.org/faqs/mail/mh-faq/part1/preamble.html>]
are classic cases of this;
users usually run the main command (elm or mh or xmh)
and the many little utilities are run within the system.
Nevertheless the "stock" install puts innumerable utility
executables in the main F<bin>
directory of the victi^Wtarget machine, many with horribly
generic names like "next" or "forward".
It is far better that these packages keep their utilities squirrelled away
in places like F</opt/elm/bin>.
Instead, we put a single wrapper script in C</opt/bin>
which inserts the C</opt/I<package>/bin>
directory at the front of the C<$PATH>
and then execs the real executable.
In this way the main package is accessible as normal
and the general utility names do not pollute the default
command namespace.
For example, the my elm wrapper:

	#!/bin/sh
	PATH=/opt/elm/bin:$PATH
	MANPATH=/opt/elm/man:$MANPATH
	export PATH MANPATH
	exec /opt/elm/bin/elm ${1+"$@"}

It is installed as F</opt/bin/elm>.

Note: users who truly wish the package's utilities in their default C<$PATH>
can naturally add F</opt/I<package>/bin>
to their own path in their C<.profile> file.

=item Populate F</opt/bin> etc with links

Some packages have a single executable
(like netscape)
or genuinely have several executables with nice distinctive names
(like netpbm [L<http://freshmeat.net/projects/netpbm/>]).
In that case the natural thing to do is to go to C</opt/bin>
and add symlinks to the executable(s) and matching symlinks for
the manual entries, eg:

	$ cd /opt/bin
	$ ln -s /opt/netscape/netscape
	$ ln -s /opt/netscape-4.79/netscape netscape-4.79

or

	$ cd /opt/bin
	$ ln -s /opt/netpbm/bin/* .
	$ cd /opt/netpbm-10.17/bin
	$ for bin in *
	> do ln -s /opt/netpbm-10.17/bin/$bin /opt/bin/$bin-10.17
	> done

Notice that we make both unversioned and version links
so that users can run the default app or a specific version if needed.

=back

=head3 What about per-machine dynamic files?

Some packages include their dynamic components in the install.
For example,
NNTPCache [L<http://www.nntpcache.org/>]
includes a C<var> subdirectory
to hold its news spool.

My approach with these is to make a matching
F</var/I<package>> subdirectory
(or F</var/spool/I<package>> is appropriate)
on the client machines which will run the package,
and to make the C<var> subdirectory
in the install directory a symlink to F</var/I<package>>.
This means that the package can continue to believe in its "normal"
install structure
and still correctly access the local, dynamic files.
It also protects those files from syncopt by shifting
them out of the C</opt> area.

if there's significant structure to the "var" directory
I tend to move it sideways in the install tree:

	$ cd /u/syncopt/redhat.x86.linux/nntpcache-3.0.1
	$ mv var var.dist
	$ ln -s /var/spool/nntpcache var

Then on any client machine that will actually run it:

	$ mkdir /var/spool/nntpcache
	$ rsync -avHP /opt/nntpcache/var.dist/. /var/spool/nntpcache/.

and it's ready to go.

=head2 See Also

RedHat [L<http://www.redhat.com/>]'s RPM [L<http://www.rpm.org/>].

Debian [L<http://www.debian.org/.debian>'s apt [L<http://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/apt-howto/index>].

Sun Solaris [L<http://www.sun.com/software/solaris/>]' pkgadd [L<http://docs.sun.com/ab2/coll.47.8/SYSADV1/%40Ab2PageView/25509?DwebQuery=pkgadd&oqt=pkgadd&Ab2Lang=C&Ab2Enc=iso-8859-1>].
